Update OpenTelemetry send data to Promscale (#976)
timescale/docs: promscale/send-data/opentelemetry.md

# Send OpenTelemetry data to Promscale
Promscale natively supports the OpenTelemetry Line Protocol (OTLP) for traces
and Prometheus remote write protocol for OpenTelemetry metrics. You can use any
of the OpenTelemetry client SDKs, instrumentation libraries, or the
OpenTelemetry Collector to send traces and metrics to Promscale using OTLP.
Currently, Promscale supports only **gRPC** for traces. The OpenTelemetry

> metrics are converted into Prometheus remote write format in OpenTelemetry

Reviewer: rephrased as: You can send metrics to Promscale
**HTTP** endpoint using Prometheus remote write protocol with the OpenTelemetry
Collector. OpenTelemetry Collector converts OTLP metrics to Prometheus remote
write protocol metrics.

    Promscale. Use `queue_size` to hold the data before dropping, and `timeout`
    is timeout for the write request to the backend, Prometheus remote write
    exports the OTLP metrics to the Prometheus remote storage backend. Configure
    the Promscale http endpoint to ingest the metrics. 
  * **Processors**: to run on data between being received and being
    exported. Batch processor is to batch, compress the data, and to control the
    number of outgoing connections, configured with `send_max_batch_size` and
    `timeout` to send data, Promscale recommends 10 seconds.
  * **Service**: to configure what components are enabled in the Collector based
    on the configuration found in the receivers, processors, exporters, and
    extensions sections. Pipeline to receive the traces and metrics from OTLP,
    batch process them, and to export the data in logs and OTLP,
    Prometheus-supported backends.

With this configuration you can send the traces from OpenTelemetry applications
to the Collector and export them to Promscale.

```yaml
receivers:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
      http:

exporters:
  logging:
  otlp:
    endpoint: "<PROMSCALE_HOST>:<gRPC_PORT>"
    tls:

>       insecure: true

Author: Works as a starting point `insecure` should be fine, using TLS adds additional friction for the users getting started as it needs configuring certs both on the collector and Promscale end.

We can re-iterate over this based on incoming requests from the users on TLS.

    sending_queue:
      queue_size: 1000000
    timeout: 10s
  prometheusremotewrite:
    endpoint: "<PROMSCALE_HOST>:<HTTP_PORT>/write"
    tls:
      insecure: true

processors:
  batch:
    send_batch_size: 4000
    send_batch_max_size: 4000
    timeout: 10s

service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [otlp]

>       exporters: [logging, otlp]

Author: logging exporter logs the state that spans are being ingested. It doesn't log the content of the trace it's optional. I will drop as it as no influence on the settings.

instrumentation libraries or the OpenTelemetry Collector to send traces to
Promscale using OTLP. Currently, only **gRPC** is supported.

## Send data using OpenTelemetry Collector
You can configure the OpenTelemetry collector to forward traces to Promscale. Promscale listens
to OTLP data on the port you specified with the `otlp-grpc-server-listen-address`
parameter when you started the Promscale connector.

The below OpenTelemetry collector configuration file, configures 
  * **Receivers**: Jaeger (gRPC, thrift http), OpenTelemetry line protool (gRPC, http)
  * **Exporters**: OpenTelemetry line protocol configure the Promscale gRPC server to export the data to Promscale, queue_size to hold the data before dropping and `timeout` is timeout for write request to backend. 
  * **Processors**: Batch processor is to batch, better compress the data and to control the number of outgoing connections, configured with `send_max_batch_size` and `timeout` to send data as per Promscale recommendation.
  * **Service**: Pipeline is to configure to receive the data from Jaeger and OTLP, batch process them and to export the data in logs and to OTLP supported backend.

> With below configuration you can send the traces from Jaeger and OpenTelemetry applications to the collector and can be exported the ame to Promscale. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this configuration you can send the traces from Jaeger and OpenTelemetry applications to the collector and export them to Promscale. 
```

```yaml
receivers:
  jaeger:
    protocols:
      grpc:
      thrift_http:
  otlp:
    protocols:
      grpc:
      http:

exporters:
  logging:
  otlp:
    endpoint: "<PROMSCALE_HOST>:<gRPC_PORT>"
    tls:
      insecure: true
    sending_queue:
      queue_size: 1000000
    timeout: 10s

processors:
  batch:
    send_batch_size: 4000
    send_batch_max_size: 4000
    timeout: 10s

service:
  pipelines:
    traces:
      receivers: [jaeger, otlp]
      exporters: [logging, otlp]
      processors: [batch]
```

Replace `<PROMSCALE_HOST>` and `<gRPC_PORT>` with the corresponding Promscale hostname and gRPC port. 
For example, if you are running the OTLP Collector and the Promscale Connector on a 
Kubernetes cluster the endpoint parameter would be similar to
`endpoint: "promscale-connector.default.svc.cluster.local:9202"`

> ## Send the data using OpenTelemetry instrumentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Send data using OpenTelemetry instrumentation
```

We recommend that you use the OpenTelemetry Collector to export data to an 

> observability backend in production as it offers batching, queued retries and many other functionalities by configuring the processors. However, you can also send data from 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
observability backend in production as it offers batching, queued retries, and other functions by configuring the processors. However, you can also send data from 
```

OpenTelemetry instrumentation libraries and SDKs directly to Promscale using 
OTLP.

> With Opentelemetry SDKs you can configure the exporter backend using `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_ENDPOINT` environment variable on your applications end. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Opentelemetry SDKs you can configure the exporter backend using the `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_ENDPOINT` environment variable on your applications' end. 
```

Promscale using OTLP. Currently, only **gRPC** is supported.

## Send data using OpenTelemetry Collector
You can configure the OpenTelemetry collector to forward traces, metrics to Promscale. Promscale listens
to OTLP data on the port you specified with the `otlp-grpc-server-listen-address`
parameter this defaults to port `:9202` and Promscale listen to Prometheus data on the port you specified with the `ee` this defaults to port `:9201` when you started the Promscale connector.

The below OpenTelemetry collector configuration file, configures 
  * **Receivers**: Jaeger (gRPC, thrift http), OpenTelemetry line protool (gRPC, http)

>   * **Exporters**: OpenTelemetry line protocol configure the Promscale gRPC server to export the data to Promscale, queue_size to hold the data before dropping and `timeout` is timeout for write request to backend, Prometheus Remote Write is to export the OpenTelemetry line protocol metrics to Prometheus remote storage backend configure the Promscale http endpoint to ingest the metrics. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **Exporters**: OpenTelemetry line protocol to configure the Promscale gRPC server to export the data to Promscale. Use `queue_size` to hold the data before dropping, and `timeout` for the write request to the backend. Prometheus remote write exports the OpenTelemetry line protocol metrics to the Prometheus remote storage backend. Configure the Promscale HTTP endpoint to ingest the metrics. 
```

Not 100% sure on this edit, please check.

  * **Processors**: Batch processor is to batch, better compress the data and to control the number of outgoing connections, configured with `send_max_batch_size` and `timeout` to send data as per Promscale recommendation.

>   * **Service**: Pipeline is to configure to receive the data from Jaeger and OTLP (traces, metrics), batch process them and to export the data in logs and to OTLP, Prometheus supported backends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * **Service**: Pipeline to configure to receive the traces and metrics from Jaeger and OTLP, batch process them, and export the data in logs to OTLP and Prometheus-supported backends.
```

Collector. OpenTelemetry Collector converts OTLP metrics to Prometheus remote
write protocol metrics.

## Configure Promscale Connector
Promscale listens to OTLP traces on the port you specify in the
`tracing.otlp.server-address` parameter, the default port is `9202`. Promscale
listens to Prometheus metrics on the port you specify in the
`web.listen-address` parameter, the default port is `9201` when you start the
Promscale Connector. For more information about configuring Promscale Connector,

> see [Promscale CLI reference][promscale-cli].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
see the [Promscale CLI reference][promscale-cli].
```

    recommends 10 seconds.
  * **Service**: to configure what components are enabled in the Collector based
    on the settings in the `receivers`, `processors`, `exporters`, and
<<<<<<< HEAD
    `extensions` sections. Pipelines to receive the traces and metrics from OTLP,
    batch process them, and export the data in logs and OTLP to backends
    supported in Prometheus.
=======
    `extensions` sections. Pipeline to receive the traces and metrics from OTLP,
    batch process them, and export the data to OTLP gRPC, Prometheus remote-write
    supported backends.

> >>>>>>> 48d6b2516b0d63b476dc3049714385792ba3e723

Reviewer 2: Merge conflict markers here.

Author: These merge conflict markers don't exist anymore.

      receivers: [jaeger, otlp]
      exporters: [logging, otlp]
      processors: [batch]
    metrics:
      receivers: [otlp]
      processors: [batch]
      exporters: [prometheusremotewrite]
```

Replace `<PROMSCALE_HOST>`, `<gRPC_PORT>` and `<HTTP_PORT>` with the corresponding Promscale hostname, gRPC port, and HTTP port. 
For example, if you are running the OTLP Collector and the Promscale Connector on a 
Kubernetes cluster the endpoint parameter would be similar to
`endpoint: "promscale-connector.default.svc.cluster.local:<PORT>"`

## Send data using OpenTelemetry instrumentation
We recommend that you use the OpenTelemetry Collector to export data to an 

> observability backend in production as it offers batching, queued retries, and many other functions by configuring the processors. However, you can also send data from 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
observability backend in production as it offers batching, queued retries, and many other functions by configuring the processors. However, you can also send data from 
```

We need to add guidance on hyphenation for words like backend to our word usage guide. For `backend` IBM says to hyphenate, Google says one word 🤷‍♀️

* `<PROMSCALE_HOST>`: hostname of Promscale
* `<gRPC_PORT>`: gRPC port of Promscale. The default port is 9202.  
* `<HTTP_PORT>` : HTTP port of Promscale. The default port is 9201.

If you are running the OTLP Collector and the Promscale Connector on a
Kubernetes cluster the endpoint parameter is similar to `endpoint:
"promscale-connector.default.svc.cluster.local:<PORT>"`

## Send data using OpenTelemetry Instrumentation SDKs

The specifics of the configuration are different for each SDK and library. For

> more information, see [OpenTelemetry documentation][otel-docs].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
more information, see the [OpenTelemetry documentation][otel-docs].
```
